See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/308158087
Chunking mechanisms and learning
Article · January 2012
CITATIONS
47
READS
20,621
2 authors, including:
Fernand Gobet
London School of Economics and Political Science
422 PUBLICATIONS   13,650 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Fernand Gobet on 14 August 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

CHUNKING MECHANISMS AND LEARNING  
Fernand Gobet 
Department of  Psychology, Brunel University 
Uxbridge 
United Kingdom 
fernand.gobet@brunel.ac.uk 
 
Peter C. R. Lane 
School of  Computer Science, University of  Hertfordshire 
Hatfield 
United Kingdom 
p.c.lane@herts.ac.uk 
 
Synonyms 
 
Definition 
A chunk is meaningful unit of  information built from smaller pieces of  information, and chunking  is the 
process of  creating a new chunk. Thus, a chunk can be seen as a collection of  elements that have strong 
associations with one another, but weak associations with elements belonging to other chunks. Chunks, which 
can be of  different sizes, are used by memory systems and more generally by the cognitive system. Within 
this broad definition, two further meanings can be differentiated. First, chunking can be seen as a deliberate, 
conscious process. Here, we talk about goal-oriented chunking . Second, chunking can be seen as a more 
automatic and continuous process that occurs during perception. Here, we talk about perceptual chunking . 
 
Theoretical Background 
Chunking as a mechanism was initially proposed by De Groot (1946/1978) in his study of  chess experts’ << 
link to Development of  expertise>> perception, memory and problem solving, to explain their ability to 
recall briefly presented positions with a high level of  precision. It was also a central ingredient of Miller’s 
(1956) classical article about the limits on human information-processing capacity. Miller proposed that chunk 
are the correct measure for the information in the human cognitive system, and that 7 ± 2 chunks can be

held in short-term memory. Chase and Simon (1973) proposed a general theory of  processes underpinning 
chunking. It is interesting to note that the approaches of  De Groot as well as Chase and Simon emphasize 
the implicit nature of  chunks, that are seen as the product of  automatic learning processing sometimes called 
perceptual chunking. Miller’s view emphasizes a type of strategic, goal-oriented chunking , where chunking is 
essentially re-coding of  the information in a more efficient way. For example, the 9-digit binary number 
101000111 can be re-coded as the 3-digit decimal number 327, making it easier to process and memorize for 
humans. The presence of  chunks explains how humans, in spite of  strict cognitive limitations in memory 
capacity, attention, and learning rate, can cope efficiently with the demands of  the environment. Chunking 
has been established as one of  the key mechanisms of  human cognition, and plays an important role in 
showing how internal cognitive processes are linked to the external environment. 
There is considerable empirical evidence supporting the notion of  a chunk, for example in our ability to 
perceive words, sentences or even paragraphs as single units, bypassing their representation as collections of  
letters or phonemes; this explains, for example, how skilled readers may be insensitive to word repetition or 
deletion. Particularly strong evidence is found in those studies which use information about the timing of  
responses to infer the presence of  chunks. The use of  response times assumes that the output of  elements 
within a chunk will be faster than the output of  elements across different chunks. This is because the 
elements within a chunk belong to the same structure, as well as sharing a number of  relations. There is good 
empirical evidence confirming that subjects’ pauses are shorter within chunks than between chunks. For 
example, timing information shows that when the alphabet  is recited back, letters are grouped in clusters, and 
clusters grouped in super-clusters. When trained to learn alphabets using scrambled letter orders, subjects also 
recall letters in a burst of  activity followed by a pause, and therefore show evidence for clusters. 
The strongest empirical evidence for chunks is based on their inference from several converging methods. 
For example, studies on chess have shown that chunks identified by latencies in recall or placement of chess 
pieces correlate highly with chunks identified by the number of  relations shared between successively placed 
pieces. By analyzing the patterns picked out by chess players within a position for various natural relations 
(including proximity, color, and relations of  attack or defense), it is evident that within-chunk relations are 
much stronger than between-chunk relations. This pattern was found whether the subjects were asked to 
place pieces on the board from memory (using timings to separate the groups), or to copy a board (using the 
presence of  glances between the two boards to separate the groups). Further empirical evidence for chunking 
has been uncovered in a number of  other areas including artificial-grammar learning, problem solving, and 
animal research. 
The chunking theory,  developed by Chase and Simon (1973) was an important attempt to formalize the 
mechanisms linked to chunking. It postulated that attention is serial and short-term memory limited to about 
seven items (Miller’s magical number). When individuals acquire information about a domain with practice 
and study, they acquire an increasingly larger number of  chunks, which themselves tend to become larger, up

to a limit of  four or five items. While learning is assumed to be slow (10 seconds per chunk), recognition of  
the information stored in a chunk occurs in a matter of  hundreds of  milliseconds. Another important 
assumption is that chunks are linked to possible information. For example, in chess, the domain in which the 
theory was first applied, a chunk could provide information about potentially useful moves (see Figure 1). 
Chunks help in a recall task, because groups of  pieces rather than individual pieces can be stored in short-
term memory. They also help in a problem-solving task, because some of  the chunks, being linked to 
potentially useful information, provide clues about what kind of  action should be taken. 
Figure 1. Top panel: examples of  chunks in a chess position. Bottom panel: one of  the chunks elicits a 
possible move (retreating the white bishop). 
 
There is also evidence that people, in particular experts in a domain, use higher-level representations than 
chunks. For example, data from chess research indicate that sometimes the entire position, up to 32 pieces, is 
handled as a single unit by grandmasters. In addition, evidence from expertise research indicates that 
information can sometimes be encoded in long-term memory faster than the 10 seconds proposed by 
chunking theory. Together, these results led to a revision of  the chunking theory with the template theory  
(Gobet & Simon, 1996). The template theory proposes that frequently used chunks become “templates”, a 
type of  schema 
. A template consists of  a core , which contains constant information, and slots , where variable 
information can be stored. The presence of  templates considerably expands experts’ memory capability. 
The image cannot be displayed. Your computer may not have enough memory to open the image, or the image may have been corrupted. Restart your computer, and then open the file again. If the red x still appears, you may have to delete the image and then insert it again.
